Request to Retire Locally Issued CIDs (#2769)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-transport.md

local address SHOULD retire all connection IDs used on that address once it no
longer plans to use that address.

The endpoint can explicitly request its peer to retire connection IDs by sending
a NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame that contains a Retire Prior To field.  The peer is
required to retire these connection IDs in a timely manner.  On receipt of the
acknowledgement for the packet that contained the NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame, the

> endpoint may start a 3 PTO timer, which on expiring may close the connection

Reviewer: MAY and MAY here

with a PROTOCOL_VIOLATION error if all the connection IDs were not retired as
requested.

> 

Reviewer 2: I think this is too aggressive. A single delayed packet could randomly take down a connection and attackers could speculate in that.

Author: How could a single delayed packet take the connection down? Best case, the same packet that acknowledges the NEW_CONNECTION_ID also contains all the RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames. Worst case, maybe you send them an RTT later. The timer here is 3 PTOs, not 3 RTT. If you haven't retired in that amount of time, how long of a time window should we allow?

Author: The other option here is not to kill the connection, but the sender just removes those CIDs from its lookup/routing tables. This means, if the peer continues to get them, they will get a stateless reset. I prefer the explicit behavior, because I feel like it is easier to diagnose when there is a problem; but I am willing to accept either solution.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I was thinking 3 RTT. 3 PTO may be enough, but an attacker could still delay so I prefer to drop such packets.

If you remove them from the routing table that is a deployment strategy - but most would likely keep a grace period before resetting or dropping. I'd imagine the middlebox load balancer is slow to update and only drops while backends are more aggressive because they are directly targeted. This is actually also true without explicit retirement - do we have any text on how to deal with that?

Author: I would also prefer a requirement that the peer MUST change CIDs immediately. I heard push back on that design. I would like to hear reasons why that wouldn't be a good idea, if anyone has some.

Reviewer 3: Mostly because "change immediately" is a difficult requirement to police.  Couching it in more concrete terms -- error on use of this CID in a packet with a higher packet number than the one which carried the ACK -- makes it easier to police in theory, but highlights what different parts of the system have to be coordinated to do it in practice.

Frankly, I'd even be okay with no longer recognizing those CIDs 3xPTO after sending the frame.  Fewer moving parts, easy to understand, but a small risk of stateless reset if the packet is severely delayed.

local address SHOULD retire all connection IDs used on that address once it no
longer plans to use that address.

An endpoint can request that its peer retire connection IDs by sending a

> NEW_CONNECTION_ID frames with an increased Retire Prior To field.  Upon receipt,

Reviewer 4: Sorry, typo: 
```suggestion
NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame with an increased Retire Prior To field.  Upon receipt,
```

the peer SHOULD retire the corresponding connection IDs and send the
corresponding RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames in a timely manner.  Failing to do so
can cause packets to be delayed, lost, or cause the original endpoint to send a
stateless reset in response to a connection ID it can no longer route correctly.

An endpoint MAY discard a connection ID for which retirement has been requested
once an interval of no less than 3 PTO has elapsed since an acknowledgement is
received for the NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame requesting that retirement.  Subsequent

> incoming packets using that connection ID will elicit a response with the

Reviewer 5: You want to say "Subsequent incoming packets using that connection ID **MAY** elicit a response with the corresponding stateless reset token."

Note that both behaviors are possible: MAY drop packets silently (misrouted, for example), and/or MAY elicit a stateless reset.

Reviewer: If by "MAY" you mean "could", that makes sense.  "MAY" in the sense of permitting something, is not really in question here.

Reviewer 5: Yes, that's right.

local address SHOULD retire all connection IDs used on that address once it no
longer plans to use that address.

An endpoint can request that its peer retire connection IDs by sending a

> NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame with an increased Retire Prior To field.  Upon receipt,

Reviewer 6: New_CONNECTION_ID frame(s)?

> NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame with an increased Retire Prior To field.  Upon receipt,

Author: I prefer the text I have already.

the peer SHOULD retire the corresponding connection IDs and send the
corresponding RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame in a timely manner.  Failing to do so

> can cause packets to be delayed or lost and harm connection performance as the

Reviewer 6: I'm a bit vague on "delayed or lost and harm connection performance as the original endpoint might not route those connection IDs optimally after some delay."  Instead, how about "delayed, lost, or cause the original endpoint to send a stateless reset in response to a connection ID it can no longer route correctly."?

original endpoint might not route those connection IDs optimally after some
delay.

> The sender of the Retire Prior To field MUST keep track of the connection IDs it

Reviewer 6: I still think this MUST is unenforceable and a bit odd.  If my load balancer restarts in 5 seconds and the peer hasn't retired the old CIDs by then, they're still getting retired.

Author: Change it to a `SHOULD`?

Reviewer 3: It's currently a MUST to persist all the CIDs with the same SRT.  The way to be compliant would be to advance RPT enough to expire all the CIDs, even if there are some in the middle that could otherwise be kept.

wishes to retire until it has received a corresponding RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID
frame, with one exception: if the sender of the Retire Prior To field has used
distinct stateless reset tokens for all of their issued connection IDs, and 3
times the PTO has elapsed since it received an acknowledgment for its Retire

> Prior To field, then it MAY lose track of that connection ID, and respond to

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Prior To field, then it MAY drop state for that connection ID, and respond to
```

> packets with that connection ID with the corresponding stateless reset token.

Author: @erickinnear can you elaborate on this? We already have the requirement that `Retire Prior To` is <= than `Sequence Number` so it cannot retire all CIDs. I'm not sure if we can require replacement of ALL previously existing CIDs.

> packets with that connection ID with the corresponding stateless reset token.

Reviewer 6: There's no requirement to supply as many as the peer wants, so there can't be a requirement to replace all it wants or as many as are retired either.

> packets with that connection ID with the corresponding stateless reset token.

Reviewer 4: We had previously discussed introducing such a requirement, but I think we might already be covered here, since we're using the existing RETIRE_CID frame for the retirement, by the "SHOULD replace when retired" that's over in that part of the text.

> packets with that connection ID with the corresponding stateless reset token.

Reviewer 4: (So you have 3 that get retired, for each that you retire, you get back a NEW_CID with the same RetirePriorTo as the original one)

: The sequence number assigned to the connection ID by the sender.  See
  {{issue-cid}}.

Retire Prior To:

: A variable-length integer specifying the limit, for which all connection IDs

>   assigned to the receiver that have a sequence number less this value should be

Reviewer 7: less "than" this value?

>   retired.  See {{retiring-cids}}.  This field is only present for type=0x19.

Reviewer: This doesn't say anything about what to do with the connection ID that is negotiated during the handshake, and the one attached to a server preferred address.

: The sequence number assigned to the connection ID by the sender.  See
  {{issue-cid}}.

Retire Prior To:

: A variable-length integer specifying the limit for which all connection IDs
  assigned to the receiver that have a sequence number less than this value

>   should be retired.  See {{retiring-cids}}.

Reviewer 8: This sentence is kind of difficult to parse.

We should also specify that this value MUST be smaller or equal to the Sequence Number carried by this frame.

Author: The text below already species this must be <=. As improving the text, I agree it's a bit wordy. Do you have any specific suggestions for improving it?

Reviewer 3: Given that the specifics of the limit are explained elsewhere, keep the field description brief.  "A variable-length integer indicating which connection IDs should be retired."

IDs, the endpoint MAY treat that receipt as a connection error of type
PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.

If the Retire Prior To field is present it is a request for the peer to
immediately retire all connection IDs with a sequence number less than the
specified value.  For more information see {{retiring-cids}}.  This field

> should only ever increase, though reordering and retransmission of older packets

Reviewer: There's lots of vague 2119-lite language here.  The language on flow control can be used here: 

> A receiver cannot renege on an advertisement however. That is, once a receiver advertises an offset, it MAY advertise a smaller offset, but this has no effect.
> [...]
> A sender MUST ignore any MAX_STREAM_DATA or MAX_DATA frames that do not increase flow control limits.

may make it seem to decrease.  So any decrease in this field should be ignored.

> 

Reviewer 2: Retransmission of packets is not the right term here but I agree with the overall intent. To be consistent with other monotonic fields perhaps says something like the SHOULD not send a smaller value unless a previous frame is retransmitted verbatim. MUST ignore frames with a prior to value less than one previously received.

This means that the entire frame is to be ignored, not just the prior to field.

Reviewer 2: Or, I'm not sure: it is a burden for the receiver to check the prior to field. The sequence number ought to be the only value ruling validity. One could state that the receiver MAY issue a protocol violation if the a sequence number is received hat contradict monotonic increase in prior to values.

Author: We have the same problem with flow control values. We allow for implementations to naively retransmit packets that were lost, as is, so it's possible you have already updated the prior to field in a more recent packet, but then retransmit an older packet.

Reviewer 2: I know, I just suggest a wording more close like those (don't recall the details)

IDs, the endpoint MAY treat that receipt as a connection error of type
PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.

The Retire Prior To field is a requirement for the peer to retire all connection
IDs with a sequence number less than the specified value.  This includes the
initial and preferred_address transport parameter connection IDs.  The peer
SHOULD immediately retire all the connection IDs.

The sender of the NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame MAY remove the connection IDs after 3

> PTO, even if the peer has not retired them yet.  The 3 PTO timer starts on

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
PTO, even if the peer has not retired them yet.  The 3-PTO timer starts on
```

> PTO, even if the peer has not retired them yet.  The 3-PTO timer starts on

Reviewer 6: I forgot about RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame the first time I read this.  Can you say something like: "not retired them with RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID yet."

acknowledgement of the packet containing the NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame.  Continued
use of the retired connection IDs after this point will likely result in a

> stateless reset being sent.

Reviewer 6: It may be worth adding a paragraph for the receiver of the NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame about stateless reset. ie:
"If a stateless reset is received in response to a retired connection ID, the reset SHOULD be ignored and the receiver should immediately switch to a connection ID that has not been retired if it has not done so already."

> In order to prevent a stateless reset sent in response to a heavily delayed

Reviewer 6: Rewording suggestion: "In order to prevent a heavily delayed packet with a retired connection ID from eliciting a stateless reset that closes the connection, the stateless reset token...."

> In order to prevent a stateless reset, sent in response to a heavily delayed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to prevent a stateless reset sent in response to a heavily delayed
```

> packet using a retired connection ID, from closing the connection, the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
packet using a retired connection ID from closing the connection, the
```
This parenthetical phrase is pretty critical and this sentence is pretty comma-heavy.  Consider promoting it.

IDs, the endpoint MAY treat that receipt as a connection error of type
PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.

The Retire Prior To field is a request for the peer to retire all connection IDs
with a sequence number less than the specified value.  This includes the initial
and preferred_address transport parameter connection IDs.  The peer SHOULD
retire the corresponding connection IDs and send the corresponding

> RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frames in a timely manner

Reviewer 8: This feels duplicate to the first diff of this PR. Maybe we can move the sentence about the initial SPA connection ID up there?

IDs, the endpoint MAY treat that receipt as a connection error of type
PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.

The Retire Prior To field is a request for the peer to retire all connection IDs
with a sequence number less than the specified value.  This includes the initial
and preferred_address transport parameter connection IDs.  The peer SHOULD
retire the corresponding connection IDs and send the corresponding

> RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame in a timely manner

Reviewer 6: frame(s)

The sender of the NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame MAY remove the connection IDs after 3
PTO, even if the peer has not retired them with RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID yet.  The
3-PTO timer starts on acknowledgement of the packet containing the
NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame.  Continued use of the retired connection IDs after this

> point will likely result in a stateless reset being sent.

Author: I'm fine with removing it if you feel having it above is enough.

> point will likely result in a stateless reset being sent.

Reviewer 4: Yeah, at least personally it feels like there's guidance on how to do that up above already, I'd probably just skip it. :)

IDs, the endpoint MAY treat that receipt as a connection error of type
PROTOCOL_VIOLATION.

The Retire Prior To field is a request for the peer to retire all connection IDs
with a sequence number less than the specified value.  This includes the initial
and preferred_address transport parameter connection IDs.  The peer SHOULD

> immediately retire all the connection IDs.

Reviewer 9: I would change this sentence to match the text before: `The peer SHOULD retire the corresponding connection IDs and send the corresponding RETIRE_CONNECTION_ID frame in a timely manner.` and also delete the next two paragraphs as they are redundant and contradict the "Detecting a Stateless Reset" section.

Author: To be clear, you suggesting I remove these two paragraphs?

> If a stateless reset is received in response to a retired connection ID, the
> reset SHOULD be ignored and the receiver SHOULD immediately switch to a
> connection ID that has not been retired if it has not done so already.
> 
> In order to prevent a heavily delayed packet with a retired connection ID from
> eliciting a stateless reset that closes the connection, the stateless reset
> token of the retired connection IDs SHOULD NOT be reused.

Reviewer 9: Yes
